Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes. I'm talking with
on Genova keel. She's a
technologist and software developer at
Uber research. How are you?
Hi, doing great. Thanks. You
have got a video online
that I would encourage everyone
who enjoys great talks, great
podcasts, great teaching. And I'm
going to make you feel
bad cause I'm gushing. You
have a YouTube it's called
learning functional programming with JavaScript.
It was a talk you
did last last year, almost
a year to the day,
and it's just a great
solid 30 minutes that puts
functional programming. Like for humans
out there that talked out
has almost a half million
views. Why did that talk
pop when so many other
talks just get a couple
hundred views and we forget
about them. Well, you know,
that, that talk is funny.
So that talk was given
at a conference called JS
unconscious, which follows the, the
kind of bar camber unconference
format where no talks are
scheduled and people just get
up at the beginning of
the day and kind of
pitch the talks that they
could give or would like
to give. And everybody votes
and selects the talks they
want to see. And I
think one reason that the
talk is so popular is
that there was a ton
of interest and there still
is in functional programming among
the web developer community, because
it's something that, you know,
there's been all these cool
functional frameworks and functional front
end languages coming out and
it's sort of was taken
for granted that everyone understood
what that meant. And I
think a lot of people,
you know, had never worked
in a functional mindset in
that paradigm before. So I
was at this conference and
people were interested in to
talk on functional programming and
nobody was, was proposing one.
So I said, well, all
right. I just recently learned
a little bit about functional
programming. Let me share with
you what I've learned. And
I think it was about
six months after I first
encountered functional programming as a
thing. And I think the
fact that it's, it was
my approach to take people
along with me on what
I had gathered as a
normal person. Non-expert in computer
science, not an expert in
type theory or all of
these, you know, crazy Haskell
programmers that have been doing
pure functional programming day in
day out for 20 years.
The fact that I was
just, you know, some person
trying to wrap her head
around functional programming, and I
was able to, to kind
of walk people through the
things that I have struggled
with and how I had
learnt to wrap my head
around them. I think people
like those kinds of talks.
I know, I love seeing
those kinds of talks at
conferences. So I, I hope,
you know, we see that
trend continue and we see
more talks from kind of
a everyday person perspective instead
of the, I am the
expert and I will explain
everything to you perspective. That's,
that's actually what the show
tries to do. That's like
what every talk that I've
ever done tries to do.
So I love that you
appreciate that. Like presenting from
on high is so different
from like, Hey, look at
this cool thing. I just
discovered like the enthusiasm is
infectious. Yeah, exactly. And that's
a, you know, that's something
that for me, gives me
a lot of motivation of,
you know, when I'm surrounded
by people that are just
excited about what they're doing
and not, not trying to
show that it's something super
hard that only geniuses and
rockstars and ninjas and whatever
it can do. I think,
you know, when, when you
have somebody who's like, Hey,
let's sit down and look
at this cause it's really
awesome. And I just learned
it. That is something that,
you know, motivates me. And
I see a lot of
other people out there being
motivated by that kind of
energy as well. So I
think, you know, if we
want to build a stronger
community altogether, we need to
start talking to each other
more on that level and
less on a, I will
now, you know, explain to
you all of the ways
in which my superior brain
has grappled with problems that
are too hard for you
to understand. Yeah. Yeah. When
I, when I talk to
companies about what it means
to be inclusive, people always
think it's about race and
gender, but it's also about
do we need to make
everyone feel bad? Like, yes,
maybe I've been working on
data sets and SQL for
the last 10 years, but
I'm doing good work. I'm
doing amazing work. Do you
have to come and say
monad within five minutes? Oh,
and now I'm like, what's
a monad and I'm feeling
bad about myself. Like inclusivity
is about letting everyone make
technology part of their life.
Absolutely. And you know, none
of us know everything about
everything, none of us know
everything about functional programming or
any particular sub field. It's
the space that programming and
computer science touches on nowadays,
given the advances in the
last, you know, 50 years,
a hundred years in these
type of these types of
problems, it occupies just way
too much space. There's no
way for one person to
have it all in their
head. And we really need
to stop thinking that that's
possible or the goal. There's
no reason that you need
to know everything. You just
need to know, you know
who to go ask when
you, when you need to
know something more specific about
a problem. And I think
that you, you, you downplay
your expertise a little bit.
You have a master's degree
and you study speech recognition
and machine learning and natural
language processing and all that
kind of stuff. There's still
a little bit of a
barrier to entry. Don't you
think for something like a
topic like functional programming and
JavaScript, or where you really
just off the top of
your head put out an
awesome talk in a half
an hour? No. Well, I
mean, one, one aspect of
that is that my background
is a rather eclectic. So
I have a, I have
a BA in philosophy, which
I, I didn't start out
as a programmer. I wasn't
programming when I was in
college. I mean, I had
done a little bit of,
you know, blogging and modifying
my HTML and styling things
with CSS and whatnot, but
I hadn't really done much
actual programming in terms of
telling the computer to execute
things. And so I, I
was a philosophy student. I
then I was always in
love with different foreign languages.
I love linguistics. I, I
became an English language teacher.
I was teaching English as
a foreign language for, for
several years. And I love
teaching. And I think teaching
is a skill that sometimes
people think of these, you
know, these, these quote unquote
soft skills. I really don't
like the term, but they
think of them as somehow,
you know, opposite to the
technical skills, the quote unquote
hard skills that you need
to be a bad ass
Ninja, functional programmer. I think,
I think they're not at
all. I think, you know,
the more people that can,
can talk about the technology
that they're using and the
technology that excites them in
a way that makes it
accessible to other people, that's
exactly the inclusivity that you
were talking about. We need
to include people in the
software that we're working with,
the software that we're building.
And so, yeah. So as
a teacher, I kind of
had that always in the
back of my mind, you
know, this idea of talking
to people about what I'm
doing, of helping them come
with me on my learning
journey. And so when I
started programming just before I
went into grad school for
computational linguistics, I, I gravitated
towards resources that made it
really friendly and accessible. You
know, I think the first
time I really sat down
and tried to teach myself
some programming. I mean, I
wasn't teaching myself. I was
using a book, I think
from the, the head first
series with O'Reilly, which is
a series I like in
terms of, they try to
make it an engaging and
interesting walk through of kind
of basic programming concepts and
what they have a whole
series. But I found that
actually got me into programming.
Whereas the first time I
tried to take a computer
science class in college, I
dropped it after a couple
of weeks because it was
just so uninviting. It was
just so sterile and dry
and there was no, no
community speak of, of people
getting each other excited about
it. So I, it wasn't
until much later that I,
that I found that community
and I studied, yeah, I
studied in the academic world.
Things like machine learning, as
you mentioned, speech recognition and
the, the software that I
was using to do the
research that I was working
on started interestingly, a lot,
actually a lot more than,
than kind of doing the
actual research. And so I
started getting curious about software
engineering as more of a
discipline and kind of filling
in the gaps in my,
in my computer science knowledge,
since I didn't have that
formal background. And I eventually
found myself at a really
amazing place in New York city
called the Recurse center, exactly.
Recurse center. It's that recurse.com.
It's a programming community in
New York. And they have basically
a space where you can
go for what they call
a programming retreat, kind of
like a writer's retreat. So
anyone who, who is already
a coder, whether that's, you
know, they've been coding for
two months or 20 years,
they can go and just
work on getting better at
programming, whatever that means to
them. And so the emphasis
is it's it's is on
completely following your own nose
and self-directed exploration of whatever
topics or technologies, whether it's,
you know, new languages, new
algorithms to you, whatever it
is that you're interested in,
you can just follow that
in a supportive environment with
other people who are also
interested in a wide variety
of different technology. And it
aims to create this really
inclusive and really supportive environment
that, that takes away all
of the other problems that
could get in the way
of your learning, all of
the, the kind of that
elite ism and this idea
of experts and, and that
not everyone can learn XYZ
technology. Not everyone can learn
functional programming or not. Everyone
is smart enough to learn
Haskell. All of that just
goes away. When you create
an environment where people are
just there to learn and
to share what they're learning
and to help each other
learn new things. And everything
is new to somebody at
some point. So help me
paint a picture here, because
I go to regress.com. One
of the first things that's
on the homepage is it
says not a bootcamp and
it goes through, and it
explains that it's not a
boot camp. It's boot camps
are built on the same
principles as traditional schools where
good teachers and willing students,
et cetera, et cetera, you
know, and talks about how
it's more community driven, but
kind of, and it also
says that it's not a
prep program. It's not preparing
you for a job. You
know, you might get a
great new job, but that's
not what it is. Help
me understand, poking a little
bit. How is this not
just hanging out with smart
people and hoping something good
happens? Well, you know, to
a certain extent, and it's
not necessarily hanging out with
smart people, but hanging out
with interested and motivated people
who are from a wide
range of backgrounds, wide range
of the technologies that they
work with, just getting a
really diverse, but super enthusiastic
group of people together in
one room can be, can
have amazing effects. And so
part of it is part
of the draw is that,
and the other part of
the draw is that, you
know, how, how many times
maybe does someone who's been
a professional developer working maybe
with the same technology for,
I don't know, what 10
years or something think, Oh,
wow. I would love to
really explore, you know, this
new language over there. Or
I would love to build
that, that app or that
game that I've been thinking
about. I would love to
get to know this open
source project, but I need
time and space to sit
down. And other people kind
of to motivate me to
sit down and actually do
it. And so it's a
way to, yeah, it's, it's
a retreat in that sense.
It's a way to kind
of signal to yourself and
possibly to the other people
in your life or the
other people around you that
you right now are focused
on your own learning. And
you're focused on, on leveling
up your skills, whatever that
means to you, whether it's,
you know, working with a
new language, whether it's building
something that you've never tried
before, whether it's just pair
programming with people all day,
because you have been working
by yourself for a while
or whatever it means to
you, you know, reading papers,
all kinds of different activities
that for different people have
a really positive impact on
their learning. Sometimes just having
the time and space to
dig into that is necessary.
Yeah. Yeah. The structure, the
idea that you may have
been programming for a year
or 10, but to sit
down and hone your craft
for three months, like a
writer's workshop, you know, you
want to be a better
novelist from a, from a
coding perspective, which isn't something
that necessarily years of practice
and years of working, isn't
going to give you because
it's about sitting down and
focusing on that and being
a better programmer at a
really focusing on quality. So
this is not a coworking
space. This is not a
bootcamp. You do have to
have some amount of focus
like you have to, they're
not going to make a
program for you. They're not
going to be, but by
program, I mean build a
curriculum, Right? There's no curriculum,
there's no courses, there's no
teachers it's completely self directed.
So it is, you know,
that's not for everybody. And
some people would be better
off and would enjoy and
get more out of a
bootcamp. Of course, you know,
but for people who are
self motivated, who have, you
know, things that they're curious
about, or maybe just want
exposure to new things that
didn't know existed and want
to be able to do
that all in a, in
an environment where the focus
is really on creating a
safe space for learning where
nobody feels dumb, because they
didn't know something, nobody feels
bad because someone is saying
that the technology that they
know is inferior to some
other technology, removing all of
those problems and just giving
people the space to kind
of flourish and do their
own thing is, is an
amazing effect of this community,
of the Recurse center. I
think they do a great
job of encouraging that. And,
you know, they have this,
the, the motto of the
recur center is never graduate.
And this is really, the
idea is that all of
us are constantly learning even
exactly. And we are all
students, you know, even the
world expert on, you know,
a particular language or the
person who wrote the book
on a particular framework, even
they have things to learn
and, you know, we can
all help each other to,
to advance our horizons and,
and come to grips with
new problems. And that makes
a stronger tech community. It
makes us stronger individually. It
makes us stronger as a
group, and they do a
really great job of fostering
that community. Let me push
back a little bit, then
not everyone's in New York, not
everyone will be, has three
months. Not everyone has the
money. How do we take
the concepts? The philosophy never
graduate and, you know, always
be educating yourself, find time
to be in your own
head and apply that to
our listeners who are all
over the world and in
various stages in their life.
Yeah, well there, I mean,
there are a lot of
great online communities that also
focus on similar, similar ideals
as it were, or similar
guidelines. I personally enjoy, you
know, face to face contact
a lot. So I find
myself at a lot of
meetups and things like the
Recurse center or conferences, but
a lot of folks get
much more out of, out
of those kinds of interactions
online and finding, you know,
Slack groups, Slack channels, where
they can find other people
that are interested in the
same things, or want to
explore the same new territory.
And so I think that
there are a lot of,
a lot of communities doing
that really well out there.
And I think, you know,
your podcast is, is a
really good example of that
as well. You talk to
so many people all over
the world that are doing
amazing things and, and by
bringing them all together in
one place for people to,
to find out and kind
of make perhaps a first
encounter with those new projects,
those new technologies, there are
so many great projects like
that, that, that aim to
of collect all those amazing
ideas in places digitally where
people can find them, you
know, on their own time.
Yeah. I think that there's,
there's definitely people who feel
alone in tech and there
it's overwhelming to know where
to go, where to find
a community, to know if
that community is a safe
space or not, whether there'll
be welcome in that community.
And whether that's really to
be a little cliche, the
community that's going to feed
their spirit, you know, if
it's going to give them
what they need to move
forward, because I know that
technology can be very, very
lonely to am. You've Googled
for the question you found
yourself asking the question and
no answers, you know, you've
Googled so much that you've
found the end of the
internet gone back to your
own blog, where you asked
the question and now you're
alone entirely, and the, you
just need another set of
eyes. Yeah, absolutely. And that's
where, you know, I think
these, the, the, the amazing
communities that grow out of
local meetups that grow out
of programs like the Recurse
center or places like the
Recurse center, where, you know,
people go there for a
few months, but then they
go back home to the,
all over the world. And
they kind of bring that,
that way of, of creating
a safe learning space to
the people that they interact
with on a, on a
one to one level, that's
something, you know, I try
and aspire to do in
my interactions with people in
my local communities. And I
think a lot of folks
that have recognized that this
is a good way to
go about doing technology. It's
more fun when we do
it together. I see that
happening all over the place
on an individual level. I
see a lot of conferences,
you know, that are, that
come out of, kind of
spin off of local meetups
and try to bring, bring
the tech world to the
local community. Instead of making
people go travel abroad to
find the people, to have
those conversations with. So hopefully
as, you know, as more
and more people talk about
this, these issues about how
isolating tech can feel about
how terrible it can feel
when you think you are
alone in banging your head
against your computer all night
and how great it can
feel when you find someone
else to, to grapple with
that with you. I think
as, as more of those
conversations take place, hopefully in
places like this on your,
on your podcast, we'll see
even more communities spring up
that really try to counteract
that isolation. So what have
you done in the last
few years as you've had
your, you did your three
months at the Recurse center,
did your hacker school, and
you did, you contributed to
open source projects. You worked
on even the HTML standard
contribution. There is still every
contribution matters. What has been
your area of study and
interest in the last few
years? So one of the
things that I got really
interested in at the Recurse
center in addition to functional
programming and kind of exploring
different programming paradigms is exploring
different languages and language programming,
language design, how languages are
implemented, the differences between them,
the kind of ecosystem of
languages out there. You know,
when I, when I started
coding, I was, I worked
in a couple of different
languages, but I wasn't really
aware of just how many
different, completely different types of
languages there are out there.
And I find that diversity
of, you know, options really
exciting because for any given
problem, you know, there is
probably a language out there
that you don't know that
could solve it better than
the, the one language that
you've been trying to, you
know, throw it every problem.
So I've got really interested
in, in programming languages. I
started exploring different ones, and
I'm always interested in learning
new languages, whether programming languages
or human languages. And so
ultimately in my, in my
kind of exploration of that,
I somehow ended up at
a company called Uber research,
which is where I work
now as a software developer.
And I work on building
our own domain specific language,
a custom query language to
interface with our data on
science research funding, basically. Yeah,
the funding aspect of, of
how science gets done, where
the money comes from, where
it goes to what publications
and patents and things like
that come out of it.
And at Uber research, we
are building a prototype query
language, our own to make
interacting with that data as
easy and painless and straightforward
as possible. And so this
is a, this is a
problem area that I, I
find really interesting how to,
you know, treating languages as
interfaces and kind of how
to do that, that interface
design, where we're not talking
about buttons on, on a
web site or something like
that, something that's visual, but
rather we're talking about how
the language allows you to
compose pieces of text that
explain or express what it
is you want to do.
And that's kind of what
we all, what we all
deal with every day as
developers. And I find that
a really interesting, really interesting
problem. Let me ask a
couple of questions from, from
my, from my ignorance perspective,
from the PR perspective, my
own ignorance, and kind of
maybe ask some kind of
like surgical questions to get
my head around this. When
does one know that it's
to make another language versus
using an existing one, because
you look at different languages,
whether it be a toy
language that someone did made,
like, for example, you made
a toy language called Kimi
Kimmy. Yeah. Keep it minimal.
Yeah. But when I look
at it and again, no
disrespect and kind of just
speaking from my own ignorance,
it looks enough like lisp
that it looks like it's
lisp. It is a list.
Yeah, absolutely. So I made
Kimmy at the Recurse center,
I'm at just as a
toy language to teach myself
about how interpreters work I
had never really dug into
that question before. I had
never really dug under the,
under the surface of, you
know, what is an interpreter?
What does it do? How
does it work? So I
think, you know, if you're
curious about the internals of
a programming language, it's time
to build a programming language
for yourself. If for no
one else, a couple of
people have found that project
helpful as they also learned
about, about languages. I never
intended it to be used,
you know, in, in any
kind of productive way, neither
by myself, nor by anyone
else. But for me, it
was an incredibly educational project
and it really helped me
kind of grow my interest
in language implementation and how
all the different, all the
different decisions you need to
make there and all the
different ways it can be
done. What would you tell
people who might look at
that though and say, it's
so overwhelming. And also what
is it going to be
used for someone might be
listening and say, you know,
I've got toy projects sitting
in my, in my local
machine, but I don't want
to put it on GitHub
because people might look at
it and say that it
sucks, but at the same
time, it's not something that's
going to be a product
or project. It is literally
a learning exercise. Why should
I put my learning exercise
out there? Cause I guess
I'm wanting to know how
you would encourage one or
tell them that they should
in fact put their experiment
or their toy out there.
I think, you know, if
people are comfortable, they absolutely
should. I think, I think
you, what you just said
touches on a couple of
issues. First of all, you
mentioned, you know, maybe they're
nervous about putting it on
GitHub because they think people
are gonna say, Oh, this
sucks. We need to stop
doing that. As, as a
collective, you know, community, we
need to stop telling other
people that the thing that
they built out of interest
and curiosity sucks because I
don't know because someone who
had more time, maybe more
experience, maybe more funding, exactly
whatever other resources sat down
and made something that perhaps
has fewer bugs or perhaps
can handle some other problem
better. That's not the point.
We are all just here
building cool things and we
should be celebrating each other
for that instead of tearing
each other down. So that's
one thing I think that
we all need to do
to make it a safer
space, to just share what
you've learned and think the
reason that I feel it's
important for other people to
share what they have been
learning and the cool toy
projects that they've been doing
just to explore new technologies
is because then if you
haven't yet to made that
first exploration and you see
someone else's introductory forays, you
know, first testing the waters
of a new technology and
you, you can more easily
see yourself getting into that
new technology. You can see
a pathway from where you
are now not having the
first clue about whether it
be VR. For example, I
was just sitting today at
the Mozilla, all hands meeting
in a session about building
VR experiences with a frame,
having not the first idea
of how to do that
and watching one of my
fellow MAs tech speakers walk
us through the most basic
hello world VR app, you
can say, Oh, okay. That's
not something that only experts
in VR technology can do.
That's something that I could
start doing right now. And
you can see that pathway
and then you build your
HelloWorld app. And then you
say, okay, I want to
get a little more ambitious
and you build the next
thing. And the next thing,
and who knows, you know,
fast forward that person who
just saw your toy project
on GitHub, that could have
been the first step in
them doing the next really
amazing kind of quantum leap
in that type of technology.
You never know, but I
think showing those people, the
path into a new area
is really important. And the
more we can all do
that, I think the better
off we're all going to
be as an industry, as
a community, as individuals. And
I think that also goes
back to, you know, the
talk, the talk I gave
at JS on which we
were talking about earlier. I
think that's one of the
reasons that people like that
as they can see a
path for themselves into this
mystical dark world of magical
functional programming. Whereas when they
just see talks by, you
know, PhDs on, on, on
category theory or whatever, it's
a, it's not so clear
to see how to get
started. Okay. Now you just
gave me something to go
on Google. Cause I don't
know what category theories that
you want me to tell
me, Maybe us just talking
about it right now. You're
going to go, you know,
fast forward a few years,
Scott Hanselman becomes the world's
foremost expert in category there.
You never know, You know
what true story, just as
you're saying this, it made
me realize that even though
I think people may meet
in may know this about
me, that even though I've
been writing software as a
business for since 1992, so
25 years, I didn't graduate
from college until 2003. And
for one of my projects
in my junior, I want
to say my junior year
I wrote a tiny O
S in C sharp. This
is in 2000, it was
July of 2000 and no
may of 2002. And this
is before GitHub. This is
before get, I think I
have a zip file of
this thing. And 12 years
ago I looked at it
and was like personally offended
by looking at the code.
So now we are 15
years away from this code.
I'm going to see if
it still runs and if
I can port it to
modern C-sharp and I want
to put it on get
hub. So I can lean
into this code 15 years
old. So, because you said,
so I'm going to put
this horrible, horrible thing online,
and maybe someone will have
a kick looking at it
because I know that it
compiled once and it did
get me out of the
class. So I did pass
operating systems three, three 12,
because of his project. Well,
there you go. It already
served more than, you know,
more than enough purpose to
justify its existence. But I
think that, that, that, that's
another thing about when people
put their, you know, experiments
and their little tests up
on GitHub or whatever, whatever
place in public where people
can find it. It's also,
it's kind of like a,
you know, a journal and
you can see, you can
see progress. I mean, I
also have those kinds of
that reaction of, Oh God,
I can't believe this code
when I go back and
look at old things, but
that's because I've, I've had
a journey, you know? And
there was a time when
I was really excited that
I pressed buttons on my
computer and then it did
the thing I wanted. Even
if the code wasn't elegant,
even if it wasn't, you
know, following best practices, let's
say maybe it wasn't very
reusable, but it did the
thing I wanted. And, and
I was excited by that.
And now I'm maybe excited
by slightly different things where,
you know, I get excited
about, Oh, well I found
a cool way to test
this part of my code
or something like that. But
if we put all of
that in the open, if
we all kind of talk
about those, those little experiments
and those things that get
us excited, then other people
can see. Wow. All right.
You know, they, weren't always
completely fluent in technology ex
they started somewhere just like
I'm starting somewhere. Yeah. Well,
I appreciate that. And I
appreciate you and for coming
on the show today. Oh,
well, thank you so much
for having me. It's it's
been great chatting with you.
I'm going to go ahead
and add everything that we
talked about to the show
notes, and I would encourage
everyone to check out you're
on. Jenna's fantastic. Talk on
functional programming JavaScript, which if
I understand correctly was not
only spontaneous, it was your
first public tech talk. Is
that correct? Yeah, it was,
it was my first talk
at a, at a software
conference. Yeah. Now you're flying
all over doing tech talks
so who can do this
kind of thing. Yeah, exactly.
Everyone has something interesting to
say. And so I think
that, you know, the more
people we see at places
like conferences and on podcasts
and on GitHub kind of
sharing their journeys and their
stories and their experience it
the better off, we're all
gonna be. Fantastic. Thank you
so much. Thank you. This
has been another episode of
Hansel minutes and we'll see
you again next week.